Good morning.
Welcome to session 925,
Debugging and Profiling
Your iPhone Application.
My name is Dave Payne.
I'm the manager of the
Analysis Tools team at Apple.
Now, perhaps you went to the
Developer Tools State of the
Union address on Monday afternoon
where Max Druckmann in the Dashcode
demo built an application that he
referred to as Where Would Dave Go?
So that's easy.
My colleagues and I are very excited
this morning to tell you about debugging
and profiling your iPhone applications.
We'll be doing this with both the iPhone
itself as well as the iPhone Simulator.
We'll start out with an
overview of the tools,
then get into the heart of the content.
Along the way,
we'll look at specific situations
that are fairly common to
run into in development.
So debugging with Objective-C properties,
finding buffer overruns,
finding over-released objects,
and profiling application launch time.
The primary tools that you'll use for
debugging and profiling for your iPhone
applications are the same as those that
you would use for your Mac applications.
So the Xcode IDE,
the Instruments Analysis Tool,
and the Shark Profiling Tool.
As you know,
Xcode provides a full graphical source
code debugging environment that gives
great ways to view your variable
values and modify those both in a
variable view window through data tips.
It's got full debug breakpoint
support with conditional
breakpoints and breakpoint commands.
Debugging in line with
your source editor,
the mini debugger to not leave
your application environment
when you're debugging.
Instruments is a great way to visualize
the behavior and the performance of
your application or your entire system.
It can collect multiple tracks of
performance data at the same time,
lets you filter in on time slices,
you can correlate events between
the different event tracks,
and just sort down through and really
hone in on the information you need.
Shark is a great
CPU profiling application.
It's got very low overhead.
It can profile down to the source line
level or even the instruction level.
It supports time profile on
your iPhone applications.
So all of these applications,
all these tools are available
for both your Mac applications
and your iPhone applications.
We've got some additional tools as well.
So we have the DTrace Scriptable
Dynamic Tracing Facility that gives you a
lot of power to go in and trace anything
in your application or even the kernel.
We've got a debugging malloc
library called guard malloc that
lets you find buffer overruns.
There's a facility in the
Cocoa framework called NSZombie that
lets you find overreleased objects.
And we've got a variety of command
line tools that you can run in
a terminal window to sample your
application or look at its memory usage.
So these are all great.
They really help you look at
things on your Mac applications,
but they're not available on the iPhone.
Some of them take too much
system resources to be
able to run on the iPhone.
Or in the case of the command line tools,
we don't have a terminal
environment available there.
But there is a solution that you
can use the full suite of tools
in the iPhone app simulator.
So you can use these techniques
on your iPhone applications,
and we'll show how to do that.
So how does that come about?
Well, of course, Mac applications,
the entire stack you've
built as a Mac application,
you're running on the Cocoa frameworks,
the Mac OS X system libraries,
the Mac OS X kernel, all on your Mac.
Your iPhone applications
running on the device,
they're all built for that environment.
Your application is working
with the Cocoa Touch frameworks,
the iPhone OS system libraries,
the iPhone OS kernel,
on the iPhone or the iPod touch.
But the iPhone Simulator provides
kind of a hybrid environment that
you have your application built as
if it was actually a Mac application.
For example, built for x86.
It's running on a version of
the Cocoa Touch frameworks
that are built for x86.
But then these are running on
the Mac OS X system libraries,
the Mac OS X kernel,
interacting with the Mac OS X daemons.
And so because it's kind of an
iPhone app that's really running
as a Macintosh application,
that's how the tools are then
able to apply in this situation.
So let's go ahead and take a look
at debugging with the iPhone SDK.
I'd like the debugger team manager,
Chris Friesen, to take you through that.
Thanks, Dave.
Good morning, everyone.
I'm Christopher Friesen,
manager of the debugger team.
Now, with the iPhone SDK,
Apple has delivered to us the
desktop development experience
for your mobile applications.
Now, this means that
that the debugging interface is the same
for your mobile applications as it is
for developing Cocoa Apps for Mac OS X.
This means that you get
in-editor debugging,
crash catching, data tips,
data formatters, and breakpoint actions.
Now,
debugging in the simulator and debugging
on your device have some differences.
As Dave just said,
when you're debugging in the simulator,
you're doing an API simulation.
You're not actually
emulating any hardware.
Now,
we also only have guard malloc support
when you're debugging in the simulator.
And if you want to look at your
crash logs or system console,
you'd go to your console app
as you would on Mac OS X.
Now, if you're using properties
in your simulator app,
it requires fully declared instance
variables in the interface of that class.
And we'll talk more about that later.
To debug on your iPhone,
it's as simple as selecting
the device in the overview
popup in Xcode of your project.
And to access the system
console and crash logs,
you'd visit those tabs
in Xcode's organizer.
They're called console and crash logs.
As you use properties on the device,
you don't have to declare
the instance variables in the
interface of your classes.
We'll talk more about how that
might be a problem later if you
want to run on the simulator.
And again, remember that you have limited
resources on the phone compared to
running in the simulator on your Mac.
Now we're going to talk
about Objective-C properties.
Quick overview.
Properties are an explicit specification
of how accessor methods behave.
For instance, are you retaining a value?
Are you making a copy of the
value that's getting set?
Or are you simply doing
a simple assignment?
The compiler can then automatically
synthesize these accessors for you.
So you don't have to remember
how to code for these different
types of accessor behaviors.
Here's an instance of a
declared instance variable.
Of course, the instance variable
is in the interface.
Here it's called pwordless data.
When it's undeclared,
you don't have to declare it.
Now, when it's undeclared,
this will only run on the iPhone.
If you switch to the
simulator and try and build,
you'll get some compiler errors.
So if you're coding,
you really want to declare all
of your instance variables.
And that way,
you can switch back and forth between
the simulator and the iPhone and be
able to use some of the performance
tools that aren't available when
you're debugging on the device.
I might be thinking,
if the compiler is creating
these accessors for me,
how do I break on them?
How do I view the actual
values and how do I call these
setters and getters myself?
To set a breakpoint on a setter
when your property is defined
as @synthesized P wordless data.
To break up the setter,
you'd set a breakpoint at set,
and then you'd capitalize
the first letter of the first
word of the instance variable,
in this case, p, wordless data,
ending with a semicolon.
To break on the getter,
you'd set a symbolic breakpoint
on the method pwordlessData.
Now you can also create a property where
you've mapped the instance variable name
to a different name that you're going
to actually use in your source code.
So in this case,
the instance variable is pwordlessdata,
but we've mapped that to wordlessdata,
so we can just type
wordlessdata in our source.
That means the accessors are
now based on wordlessdata,
so to break on the setter,
we set a break -- symbolic break point
at set capital W wordlessdata colon,
and to break at the getter,
it's simply breaking on wordlessdata.
Now here we've broken at the setter.
This is what our stack
trace would look like.
We see that we've broken on
set word list data colon.
Now when that's selected,
In the stack frame view,
in your source code,
the PC will actually show the PC arrow
at the end of the implementation.
for that particular class.
So you'll need to look at the source--you
will need to look at the stack in order
to see exactly why you've broken there.
and what the method name is.
Now if you go up a stack frame,
you'll see that we have in fact stopped
where we're using the properties
dot notation to set the instance
variable for wordless data to a value.
How do you go about viewing
some of these values?
Now, if you happen to still be using
undeclared instance variables,
they won't show up whenever you turn
open the variable in the variables view.
If they are declared,
then they do show up.
You can still access the values
by calling an expression in
Xcode's debugger console,
simply using the normal
Objective-C bracket notation.
So in this case, in the last line there,
it says we're going to evaluate the
expression in Xcode's debugger console,
PO, open brace, self, word list data,
close brace.
And that'll print that
instance variable's value.
Now let's do a quick demo of
Objective-C properties and crash logs.
We can switch to Demo Machine 7.
Now we'll open our project.
And we'll set our breakpoint on setter.
Set P word list data colon.
And then we'll click build and go.
The application is now installing
over to the device over USB.
It's being sandboxed.
User preferences are being archived.
and now starting the remote
debugger and launched in GDB.
And we see that in our
breakpoints window here,
our symbolic breakpoint
has been grayed out.
and the Enable Breakpoints
checkbox is now in the mixed state.
This means that the debugger was
unable to resolve the breakpoint.
So we might have used
the wrong symbol name.
So let's do a project find on that.
Synthesize.
and David Gulland:
So here we see that it's been mapped
to the other name as we saw in
one of the example slides earlier.
So we actually want to set our
breakpoint on set word list data,
not set pword list data.
So now we'll jump back
to our breakpoints.
And we'll set our symbolic breakpoint
on set word list data colon.
And we can also set our
breakpoint on the accessor,
word list data.
And we see by location column that
the debugger has actually been
able to find symbols for these
breakpoints in the executable.
So now I will quickly shake the device
and play a little bit of Boggle.
We'll hit the breakpoint.
And we see here in the stack frame that
we've broken that set word list data.
and the PCRO is pointing at the at end.
So when the PCRO is
pointing at the at end,
you want to jump,
you want to look at the stack
view to see exactly why you've
broken and what the method is.
And here we've set,
we're calling the setter.
And if we continue, we see the same thing
whenever we're at the getter.
What do you do when you're running
your application and you're not
running it in the debugger and
something happens to your application?
So if we can switch to the device.
If we could switch to the device, please.
There we go.
And we'll launch our app.
It's good old baffle.
And instead of shaking it,
I will drag my finger around,
or no I won't.
There we go.
Worked better in practice.
All right,
so now I'll try to spell a word.
There we are.
And our applications crashed.
So what do we do?
We didn't have the debugger attached.
Well,
- You would go to the
organizer back in Xcode.
So if we can switch back
to the demo machine.
And we'll go to Window and Organizer.
And here's our device.
And we can click on the console.
And then we can search filter on baffle,
which is the name of our application.
And we'll click reload to make
sure we have the latest messages.
And here it tells us that
Are application deactivated?
I don't see any crash logs.
We should check the crash logs anyway.
When you click on Crash Logs,
it'll go and fetch the
crash logs from the device.
And here we see that it has in
fact symbolicated the crash log.
and the crash happened near
BGbaffleward.m at line 68.
So let's switch back to slides
and talk about crash logs.
The crash logs get copied from the device
into Xcode every time you visit that tab.
They also get copied over when
-- the first time you plug in
a device when Xcode's launched.
Now the symbolication happens
on the host immediately after
those crash logs are copied over.
And it uses the symbols
not only from the SDK,
but from the DSIM file,
which has your debugging symbols,
because it has a matching
unique identifier inside of it.
And we use a spotlight
search to find that,
and then we look for the dot app in
the same directory because we need a
couple symbols out of that as well.
So you want to ensure that spotlight
indexing is enabled on your laptop in
order to get symbolicated crash logs.
If you ship your application
or give it to development or,
I'm sorry,
Q&A because you want some testing
done and you want to be able to
symbolicate those crash logs later,
you want to save off the DSIM file as
well as the .app in the same location.
Each time you build,
those DSIM files get overwritten
in order to match the new
application that's been generated.
So what exactly are DSIM files?
Well, they're the fully linked dwarf
information for your executable.
They're the debugging symbols.
And as I said earlier,
the DSIM has a unique identifier
inside it that matches the
executable unique identifier.
And they're generated in the same
directory by the build system.
These stay on your Macintosh.
They don't get sent to the
device or anywhere else.
And they're necessary for verbose
debugging and crash logs and instruments,
as we'll see later.
Here's a quick graphical representation
of your build products directory
with an executable and a DSIM with
matching unique identifiers.
Now let's talk about memory access issues
and how you find them using GuardMalloc.
So GuardMalloc catches your
memory access problems.
It's only available in the Simulator
for your iPhone applications.
It forces an immediate
crash on bad memory access.
For instance, buffer overruns,
buffer underruns,
accessing freed or unallocated memory,
and also accessing uninitialized memory.
So how does it work?
Well, each allocation happens
on a separate VM page.
To catch buffer overruns,
your allocation is aligned
with the end of the page.
And then a guard page is placed after it,
like this.
Now to catch buffer underruns,
you have to set one of
guard malloc's options.
In my environment variable
malloc protect before.
Then,
The allocation starts at the
beginning of the VM page and the
guard page is placed before that.
And this will cause a crash if you try
and access memory before the allocation.
To enable GuardMalloc in Xcode,
go to the Run menu,
go down to the bottom,
and check Enable GuardMalloc.
This is effectively setting
an environment variable,
DYLD_INSERT_LIBRARIES,
pointing at the libgmalic dilib.
Now for more information about
GuardMalloc and all its options,
you want to look at the
man page for libgmalloc.
Note that the man page
is not called malloc,
so you want to make a note of that.
And now I'll have a demo of
catching memory access exceptions.
We can switch to the demo machine.
So here we are and we're going
to build and go on our device.
It's not the same baffle.
It'll behave a little bit better than
crashing after selecting four words.
So we're still installing now.
It's copying it over the USB.
Doing the things that it does,
all those seven things they talked
about in the State of the Union.
So now it's running on the device.
I'll start a new game.
I'll shake it.
Now we can see that it's
behaving much better.
Now, memory access issues can be rather
insidious because your application
may seem like it's perfectly fine.
You may be corrupting data.
Pardon?
You may be actually corrupting data.
So let's switch to running in the
simulator with GuardMalloc enabled.
Now we click Build and Go.
It's installing the
application in the simulator.
This is the first time I've run the
simulator today after rebooting,
so it takes a little while to come up.
Here it is.
Running baffle.
We can shake it.
And we've crashed.
In the status bar in the lower corner,
it told us that GDB was
attaching to the program.
And now we see that we are at has suffix.
And it looks like
And if we do a step over,
we'll see that the
program received a signal,
exe bad access.
So now let's investigate a little bit.
So if we hover over Word,
our data tip comes up
and it has an address.
But if we turn it down,
we should be seeing the first
letter of this char star,
and we aren't getting anything.
Something's a little fishy.
Let's go up here to the Variables view.
We'll Control-click on
Word and select View as Memory.
The debugger comes back telling us, hey,
we're unable to read
this memory location.
So that probably means
this memory's been freed.
And if we go up our stack,
we can see that we've gone
and malloced some memory,
done some string copies
and string cats to it,
and then freed it to make
sure we didn't leak it.
However, we're using it later.
So this is obviously freed too early.
Now, this is the same code that seemed
to be running fine on the device.
And here we see that we
actually had a memory problem.
Let's switch back to slides.
I'll leave you with some quick
troubleshooting tips if your application
doesn't launch on the device from Xcode.
The first place to check is Xcode's
debugger console for error messages.
Then you should try and
launch the application on
your device using your finger,
not trying to launch it from Xcode.
Then check the Organizer's Console tab
for provisioning or signing errors.
And finally,
check for crash logs in the Organizer.
And now let's bring up Steve Lewallen
to talk about profiling and
analysis with instruments.
Thank you, Chris.
Good morning, everyone.
So today I'd like to talk to you
about one of our premier analysis and
profiling tools known as Instruments.
We first introduced Instruments
in Leopard for analysis and
profiling in Mac applications,
and now we've extended it to
support profiling and analysis in
the simulator and on the iPhone.
So, what is Instruments?
Well, first and foremost,
it's a performance tool.
So,
you can see that you can use Instruments
to find bottlenecks in your own code.
You can look at the
memory use of your app.
You can even identify perhaps
inefficient graphics algorithms
that you have in your games.
But it's also an analysis tool.
So you can observe the
history of a pointer,
for example,
or you can look at how your system
is interacting with the file system.
You can even see how your app is
working on the device in relation to
the other processes on the device,
how much CPU it's taking
versus the CPU they're taking,
memory to memory, et cetera.
And finally,
when you're running in a simulator,
again, as Dave said,
a simulator app is basically a Mac app.
You can actually use DTrace
to look at your app from the
kernel on up to user space.
So in using Instruments,
you can do so either standalone or you
can do so from Xcode to extend that edit,
build, debug cycle into a full edit,
build, debug, profile,
and analysis cycle.
Whichever way you use it,
you use Instruments to record and
correlate arbitrary data streams.
So for example, you could say, well,
how much memory does it take
to consume this special file
my application reads in?
Whatever you do,
you can then use to record your data,
you can then use Instruments
to mine that data.
You can turn your data upside down,
inside out,
filter it on different things and
really narrow down the data to just
what is the source of your problem.
So now let's talk about using
Instruments in the Simulator itself.
There are similar capabilities
in Instruments when using a
Simulator app with Instruments.
You have the ability to
look at memory issues.
You can look at CPU issues.
You can look at I/O issues.
In this case, using DTrace file
activity-based instrumentation.
And you can use DTrace to discover
other things that we haven't thought
of that are specific to your apps.
Now,
one thing you need to be made aware of,
and I'm sure by this
time you probably are,
but let's just go over it again.
The results that you gather in a
profiling and analysis tool such
as instruments when you're looking
at an app in a simulator has to
be interpreted a bit differently,
maybe with a healthy dose of
skepticism because when the
app is running in a simulator,
it's compiled for the Mac,
linked against iPhone
frameworks compiled for the Mac,
running on the Mac OS.
And therefore, your memory issues,
for example,
will have a different memory profile
when your app is in the simulator
than it is in the iPhone itself.
Of course, it goes without saying
also that the hardware,
whether it's a Mac Pro 8 way
or even a cool MacBook Air,
is way more powerful than your iPhone.
And so you need to be aware
that the performance envelope,
that your iPhone app is running in,
in the simulator is different than
the far more constrained environment
it will find itself in when it's
actually running on the phone.
And that's why I like to say and
point out that using instruments or
analysis tools against your app in the
simulator is best suited for analysis.
So you can observe how it's behaving,
track down different problems,
but when you want to finally
get ready to fine tune that
performance before you ship it,
you really want to use instruments
against the app on the device
itself where it's operating within
the parameters that that device,
that piece of hardware has.
So there are unique aspects to
using instruments with a simulator.
For example, some Mac instruments,
they simply don't apply.
The UR Recorder Instrument uses
accessibility frameworks on the Mac,
and we don't have that on the iPhone,
so that doesn't apply.
We don't have Core Data on the iPhone,
so the Core Data instrumentation
does not apply.
And our new garbage
collection instrument,
Object Graph,
that we introduced in Xcode 3.1,
it doesn't apply because we don't
have garbage collection on the phone.
However, the other instrumentation does.
Now, secondly,
applications are quote unquote
installed in the simulator.
So when you select a simulator app,
whether from Instruments or from Xcode,
the first thing that's going to happen,
if need be,
is that app is going to be installed
in the simulator and then it's
going to be launched for you.
So we take care of all that for you.
Now, when you're using Instruments
against your app in the simulator,
you're probably pursuing one of a few
common profiling and analysis goals.
You may be seeking to increase
the stability of your app.
Maybe you're using ObjectAlloc and
DTrace to track down an over-release.
In fact, we'll see a very useful cool
demo of that in a moment.
Or perhaps you're just trying to
reduce the memory footprint of your
app by tracking down leaked memory.
That's very valid to do in the simulator.
Or perhaps you're looking for ways
to use memory more efficiently.
If, for example,
you're putting so many objects
in the auto release pool that
that's growing very large,
then your overall memory footprint,
even though it will be temporary,
will spike.
And that could cause a danger to your
app when it's actually on that phone.
So you want to look for
those issues as well.
So now let's talk a bit more
about that over-release issue,
that increasing stability type of
goal you might have using Instruments.
So what is an over-release?
An over-release is when you have
an object that's deallocated
and then you message it.
So this will lead to unspecified behavior
in your app and an eventual crash.
And we call these
over-released objects zombies.
They're dead, but they're still walking
around making trouble.
What you need to do is diagnose
this using the NS Zombies
facility that's on the Mac.
This is only available on the Mac whether
it's a Mac app or a simulator app.
So this type of issue,
you must use instruments
with the simulator.
You can't do it on the iPhone itself.
So what would a typical scenario look
like when you're trying to diagnose
an over-release problem which quite
frankly without instruments and
without NSOMBIs would be a very
frustrating thing to have to do.
And in a retained release sort of
memory-managed language like Objective C,
this can be a fairly common thing
that will happen in your code.
So the first thing is
it's going to crash.
And you're going to see some message in
the console or the debugger that says
something happened to some mysterious
thing that was at some pointer.
And that's not very helpful at all.
So what you'll want to do is you'll
go to your executable inspector in
Xcode and you'll set the environment
variable NSZOMBI enabled to yes.
And then you'll rerun.
Now you'll get something
that's a bit more helpful.
At least you'll know what type of
object that was at that pointer.
But you still don't know
how it became over released.
So let's go and -- so what do you do now?
Well, let's go to Instruments and take a
look at how we can fully diagnose
this and just nail this problem.
So demo machine six please.
All right.
So the first thing I'm going to do is
launch my poor baffle Cocoa Touch app.
You would have thought that this
app being front and center at
this conference that we would
have had this in better shape,
but this app has suffered
the entire conference.
This time it's crashing on us here.
So I'm going to build it and I'm
going to run it in the simulator.
And I'm going to show you the basic
scenario that leads to the crash.
When I start a new game
and I select my first word,
I think is fine.
Then I select another one.
Oh, GDB is loading.
Let's go to GDB in the console.
And yes, indeed,
we get this not so helpful
message that our app has crashed,
messaging something that
was at some random pointer.
So I'm going to use Instruments to
diagnose this and track it down.
Now, the first thing that I want
to do is I want to stop my
app in the debugger here.
I want to quit the
debugger because right now,
Baffle Cocoa Touch is in
the simulator suspended.
If I would just go to Instruments
right now and try to launch a new
instance of Baffle Cocoa Touch,
it would fail.
And the reason is that the simulator
is occupied right now with this app.
So if you run into
that kind of a problem,
say, oh, I remember when Steve said
go back to the app.
I'm going to go back to
the debugger and stop it.
So I'm going to stop that now.
And I'm going to go down to Instruments.
[Transcript missing]
So, I'm going to use a little DTrace
custom instrument that I built
to surface the zombie pointer.
Now, I'm doing this as a
bit of a tease as well.
I want to encourage you guys to go
to the DTrace session later today.
I believe it's at 3:30 and then
there's a great advanced DTrace and
instrument session tomorrow morning.
So, what I'm going to do is I'm going
to go up to the upper right of
my Instruments window and I'm
going to hit the Library button.
I'm going to search for zombie.
Thank you.
So this is my little zombie
detection instrument.
Again, you could do all this
without this instrument,
but it's just going to make
it a little cooler and more
convenient in Instruments itself.
All right.
Now I'm ready to try to track
down this over-released object.
So I'm going to go and I'm going
to click the Record button in the
upper left of the Instruments window.
That's going to start up my app in the
simulator again and start recording data.
I'm going to go and put it through its
paces again that led to that crash.
Okay, crashed.
We get the crash dialogue,
which we expected.
I'll dismiss that.
Now if we look at the
NS Zombie Detection Instrument,
and far right here we
see a little spike here.
That's an event.
And the only event this
tracks is messages to zombies.
And if I look down here
in the detail view,
I can even get the
pointer to that zombie.
So I'm going to copy that out.
And now I'm going to go to
my ObjectAlloc instrument.
Now, you've seen ObjectAlloc several
times during this conference already.
Hopefully you've made great use of it
on the Mac and your iPhone apps already.
But let me just review,
just for a second here,
what we're seeing.
We have three basic detail
views in ObjectAlloc,
one of which is a summary view.
It shows all the different types
of objects it's ever seen and
categorizes them by how many times
they were created and how many are
still left when we stopped running,
et cetera.
Second view is a call tree view,
which will show me all the places
where the memory was allocated
that we saw with ObjectAlloc.
The third view is very
relevant for this bug here.
This view is an event view that
will show me all the pointers
where they're allocated,
no matter what type they were,
from the time I started
the app until it crashed.
So I have that little
pointer that I copied from my
zombie detection instrument.
So I'm going to go down to
the lower right-hand field,
the search field,
and I'm going to say search by address.
And now I'm going to
paste in that address.
And now I have the actual
object that was overreleased.
If I click on this little round
circle that has this arrow in it,
I'm going to get to the
entire history of that object.
So first I can see where it was created.
And I can see retains and
auto releases and releases.
So let's go to the extended detail view.
I'll use the view menu in the far right,
say extended detail.
And I'll reorient my back trace so
it's a bit more convenient for us here.
And I'll see that, well,
it was malloc'd here.
When I'm looking at these
frames from top to bottom,
I see a call and below it
I'll either see a library,
we see lib system, lib objc,
core foundation, et cetera,
or I'll see the actual path to a file.
That will be source code that instruments
has found that applies to this project.
So I'm going to double click on this
and I'm going to see what's going on.
Well,
It looks like it's created in
a little static factory method,
Create Table View Cell.
Cool, that seems fine.
If I look at my other retains and
releases in that initial creation,
it seems like my retain
count's pretty balanced there,
everything seems reasonable.
But two back-to-back auto releases,
that seems a little suspicious.
So let's look at where each
of these auto releases are.
So again, I'm going to click on the first
frame that I have that has source
in it that's to my project.
I'll double click there.
It again takes me to the factory method,
and I see that the factory method,
appropriately so,
is allocating a new instance of this
and then returning an auto-release.
If the caller doesn't want
to do anything with it,
it'll be cleaned up automatically.
Otherwise, they should retain it.
So that looks cool, that's fine.
Let's look at the next auto-release.
This is looking pretty
suspicious at this point.
So I'll select that,
and I'll double click on that
frame and go to the source.
Now what we have here is a table view,
cell for row and index at path.
So this API is supposed to return
an instance of UITableViewCell.
And if I look down here,
I can see that it calls the factory
method that returns an auto-release
version and then auto-releases itself.
So maybe this developer
was confused and thought,
well, I should return an auto-release
version from this method.
But actually,
that's the source of the problem.
So since this is already auto-released,
what I'm going to do is simply
delete this auto-release.
So I'll go ahead and do that now.
I'm going to hit build and run again.
And it's linking,
installing in the simulator and running.
And now put it through its paces again
to see if it still crashes on me.
And it doesn't, so this is working fine,
so that's great.
Exit Xcode, exit Instruments,
and back to slides, please.
So now we've seen how we can use
Instruments to track down what used to be
a truly maddening thing to try to find.
That would lead to instability
in your app and you'd spend many
hours trying to fix yourself.
So that was pretty simple.
So now let's move on to using
Instruments in the iPhone.
So again,
similar capabilities as profiling
Mac apps or simulator apps.
You can look at memory analysis.
You can look at CPU bound issues.
You can look at I/O.
In this case,
since DTrace isn't on the phone,
we have built a great new instrument
called the I/O Activity Instrument in the
system usage template that will basically
give you Uber on steroids version of
SF usage with call trees and back traces,
all that kind of great stuff.
And we've introduced two new
graphics instruments to look at
Core Animation and OpenGL ES.
So I'd like to encourage you to be a
bit more proactive in your analysis
in profiling of apps that are destined
for the iPhone because the iPhone
runs in a more -- the iPhone app
runs in a more sensitive environment.
It has more constraints on it.
So, for example,
you have to remember that applications
are Sandboxed on the system.
And so let's say you had a little
utility library that had some logging you
could turn on and when you turn it on,
you scrolled it away and slashed temp.
And you built that in the simulator
and everything worked great.
But when you just took that app
and you moved it to the iPhone,
suddenly your log wasn't
being created anymore.
If you use the FS usage
instrument we call IO Activity,
you'll be able to see that you get
a security permission error when
you actually try to create a file.
00:02:00:00 - 00:02:11:00 Unknown So you
want to you want to make sure that
you've dealt with those types of issues.
Secondly,
as we've sort of alluded to earlier,
if the iPhone OS determines that the
amount of memory that your app is
using is becoming a threat to the phone
itself and you're listening for it,
it will send you a low
memory notification.
And if you don't clean up or reduce the
amount of memory you're using quickly,
your app is going to be
terminated to save the phone.
00:02:11:00 - 00:02:36:00 Unknown So you
want to use the various memory
analysis instrumentation that we
have when you run it on the phone.
Remember how the memory profile
is going to be different on
the phone than the simulator.
So when you go to the phone,
you want to watch that memory,
maybe use the activity monitor just
to watch the memory and see if it
stays about at a certain level.
It doesn't just keep growing like crazy.
And you really want to make sure
that your app is ready to live out
in the real world on the phone.
So there are unique aspects to using
instruments with iPhone itself.
Again, with the simulator,
the same instruments don't
apply for the same reasons.
Now, Instruments will not install
an app on the iPhone.
We leave that task to Xcode
and the Xcode organizer.
However,
if you use Instruments from Xcode itself,
so you go to the run menu,
which we'll see in a minute,
you launch a performance tool and
Instruments starts up and your
app is launched on the phone.
In that workflow,
your app will actually be
installed on the phone for you.
So again,
you may be pursuing one of various
common profiling goals when using
Instruments with your iPhone
app actually on the device.
You may be again seeking
to increase stability,
but maybe this time you're looking
for that increasing memory issue.
Or you might have read our
developer guidelines for
writing iPhone applications.
And you read this one guideline
that said fast launch,
short use.
And what that means is your app
should launch as fast as it can and
it should save out data appropriately
so that it connects it quickly.
Or you might be trying to
improve the drawing performance
of your core animation,
your app, or an Open GLS game.
And finally,
you may be looking again at how
your app is sandboxed in the system.
So now let's take a look at another
demo of using Instruments against
your app on the device to look at your
startup time and to try to improve that.
Again, this is a perfect scenario for
using Instruments with your app on
the device itself because if you
try to measure the startup time of
your app when it's running in the
simulator on your 8-way Mac Pro,
that's not really going to be
reflective of the real world.
So let's look at Instruments
on the device itself.
So if we can switch back to demo six,
please.
Okay, so I'm going to start another
version of Baffle Cocoa Touch.
And it's targeting the device here.
And I'm going to build it.
And now I'm going to go
to the Xcode Run menu.
And I'm going to select
Start with Performance Tool.
CPU Sampler.
Now, the app is being installed,
as I said,
in this particular workflow using
Instruments in combination with Xcode.
The app will actually be
installed on the phone for you.
And it's doing all the
things that it does.
Now it's launching Instruments itself
and then Instruments will actually
launch Baffle Cocoa Touch on the device.
So one of the great things about
having this type of display in
Instruments where it's real time,
we're seeing all the effects of your
app on the system as it happens,
is that I can easily judge
when startup is over.
So I can see this area in the front,
all this activity ceased.
The app is basically idle now,
so I'm going to hit stop.
And I'm going to drill down on
that and see what's going on,
see if I can improve that.
So I'm going to use the time scale here
in the left middle section of the window,
stretch it out a bit.
And I like using running sample times,
which if you attended
the Getting Started with
Instruments session yesterday,
Daniel Delwa did a great
job of explaining the
differences in the time scale.
So I'm going to go back to my previous
screen and using Sampler in this feature.
So I'm going to select that.
And if I go to the top here
and I go to my extended detail
view and reorient my stack,
I'm going to see that all the time
the top heavy hitters here are in my
BG Sane Glass view in it with frame
calling into UI image image name.
But let's double click on
that and see what's going on.
So, here's my init method and
we have this loop here.
What's going on here?
Well, we're loading in a bunch of
images and stuffing them in this
array pcontent's image--images.
How many of these images are they?
Well, are there?
Well, there's about 50 of them.
If I double click on this,
we can see the actual--it's 51 there.
Now, these are actually the background
images for the hour sand glass.
So, as time progresses and
the game is going on,
your time is running out,
the hour glass runs down.
There's a different image
for each level of the sand.
Well,
it appears that we're loading all 50 plus
of these images when we first create the
initial UI at startup time for the app.
It also appears that we're
attempting to cache these away.
Well,
We don't really need to do
either one of these things.
We don't need to load all
these images all at once,
because it's not that big of a hit
to load one of these images every so
often as the sand progresses downward
when the user is playing the game,
because for most of the game,
the app isn't doing the
thinking the user is,
trying to find a word.
So there's plenty of horsepower
here left to load this image.
The second thing is,
perhaps this developer thought that
they could cache away this image
data so the next time they needed it,
it would be faster to render.
But actually, UIImage,
when you do image with name,
handles caching behind
the scenes for you.
So what I would assert is that
the best thing to do is actually
simply create new instances of
UI image using image named when we
actually need the background images.
So let's see where we
actually use those images.
So I'm going to do a project find.
Object at index is probably
what's going on here.
I'll do project.
And we're loading it in
two different places here.
Let me expand this window.
And I'm going to hide
my project tree there.
OK.
So we have one image here, index zero,
in the actual init with frame.
What that is is the initial background
image of the hourglass that you
see when the game first starts,
but you haven't started playing.
And the other one is basically
when time is progressing.
So as time progresses,
we figure out the next image at
a particular index to load in,
and we load that in.
In this case,
we get it from the array because
we loaded all these ahead of time.
OK.
So let's do what I suggested and just
load these images in as we need them.
So I'm going to say,
I'm going to copy out this
little line of code here.
I'm going to reuse that and I'm
going to delete this section here.
We don't need to do that anymore.
And the first thing I'm going to do
is replace this initial image load,
index position zero.
And I'm going to go ahead and
Save that away.
And I'll go to the other line as well.
And this is where we're actually
loading in the progressively
lowering sand background.
And I'll load this guy in.
Okay, I'll build that, save everything.
Okay, succeeded.
So now let's go back
to the run menu again.
One of the coolest things I like
about the integration of Xcode and
instruments is that they're really
smart about how they interact.
So Xcode knows that the last
thing it did was to run the
CPU sampler in instruments.
So I can just select that again and
it's going to go and install the app
again and do all the things it does.
And it also, working with instruments,
will then be able to say to instruments,
hey, you know,
this is another trace using CPU sampler,
but it's against that same thing you
just opened up a trace document for.
So can you reuse that previous document?
We'll see how that becomes
handy in a little bit.
So now I've launched my app again and
again with instruments we can see that
we had this little bit of activity
and now we seem to have reached idle.
So let's take a look and see if
we've cleared up that startup time.
So first of all,
if I sort by running time again,
I can see that, well,
all those big samples that I saw earlier,
they're gone.
We don't see anything in my init method,
as we would have expected,
that is loading those images.
And if I wanted to visually
just to compare it,
do a very quick look at
whether I improved performance,
I could go to the left-hand
side of the screen.
I can go to the left-hand side
of the sampler instrument and
twist down this twisty here,
and I can visually
compare the previous run.
So it's pretty easy to just
see that in the first run,
without the performance
optimization at startup time,
it took about this much time.
And, you know, when I optimized it,
then we're down to just
this little bit of activity.
So that's great.
Excellent.
The one last thing to do is to
look at what I asserted earlier.
I asserted that if I create, say,
UI and Android applications,
I can visually compare the previous run.
So it's pretty easy to just
see that in the first run,
without the performance
optimization at startup time,
it took about this much time.
And, you know, when I optimized it,
then we're down to just
this little bit of activity.
So that's great.
Excellent.
image, image name with BG timer 1,
the timer images are called BG timer 1,
BG timer 2, BG timer 3, et cetera,
if I loaded BG timer 1 and then
I created a new instance of
UIM image with the same name,
BG timer 1, that that data would not
be loaded in again even if
I deallocated the previous instance.
So let's use that IO activity
instrument to see if that
assertion was actually correct.
So I'm going to go start
a new trace document.
I'm going to go to my iPhone category of
templates now since I'm actually running
instruments against the iPhone itself.
I'm going to go to the
system usage template,
select that,
And I'm going to launch my
bafflecoco touch app again.
Instruments conveniently will list just
the apps that it sees on the device.
And I'm going to start that up again.
And if we could go to the iPhone
device display for a moment,
I'd appreciate that.
Okay, so let's just make sure first
of all that the hourglass lowers
because we don't want to have
optimized by breaking the entire app.
So the game starts and we can see down
here that the hourglass is lowering.
So let's let it go
through all of its paces.
Let's switch back to the demo machine,
please.
Demo six.
Now if we go down to the bottom
of this I/O Activity Instrument
and I search for BG Timer,
We're filtered by all those timers
so we can see the new images as they
were loaded in so the app has ended.
The time is over now,
but it's still running.
So now what I'm going to do is
I'm going to start the game again.
and the images,
the hourglass will begin to lower again.
I'm not going to keep switching
back and forth on you.
That would be a little crazy.
But if we look now at
the instrument again,
though the hourglass
images are appearing,
they're not being
reloaded from the phone,
even though I was just instantiating
new UI image instances with new names.
So I would say that we successfully
optimized the app and dealt
with startup time there.
Of course, optimization is never over.
If we can go back to the slides, please.
There could have been other
places where I still could
have optimized startup time.
So it's always nail the first guy,
the biggest guy,
and then go down to the next guy,
and the next guy, and the next guy,
until you can't get to any of your
code and it's just the system.
But we did a pretty good job of using
Instruments there against the app on
the device to optimize startup time.
So today we've talked about
a lot of very cool tools,
very powerful analysis
and profiling tools.
Our premier tools of
Xcode and the debugger,
of Instruments, and Shark.
We've also talked about our command
line tools that I have available on
the simulator and on the Mac side.
So I think the tool bag is pretty full
in that you have enough to go forth
and make your apps robust and fast,
make them have a low memory
footprint as possible,
make efficient use of the file system,
and draw really great fast graphics.
So with that, of course, the usual,
you can contact Michael Jurowicz
for more information.
You can look up various of these
helpful URLs for performance docs.
And there's a bit of a quandary that
I have and I'm going to put you into
as well today because at 3:30 today,
there's two sessions
that I'd like to be in.
There's optimizing performance
for your iPhone application.
There's also using DTrace on Mac OS X.
So I didn't set that schedule up,
but we'll all be running back
and forth passing each other,
I guess.
Also, performance tuning your
application with Sharp.
Sharp is an awesome tool.
So check that out at 5:00 today.
And finally, tomorrow,
we have our advanced
instruments and DTrace session.
So you can look at how one would build
custom DTrace instruments as I did
earlier for that over-release issue.